type=page
status=published
title=Messaging Systems: An Introduction
next=client-programming-model.html
prev=preface.html
~~~~~~
Messaging Systems: An Introduction
==================================

[[GMTOV00025]][[aerap]]


[[messaging-systems-an-introduction]]
1 Messaging Systems: An Introduction
------------------------------------

Open Message Queue is a leading business integration messaging system
designed to provide exceptional reliability and scalability.

Message Queue is a messaging middleware product that implements the Java
Message Service (JMS) standard. In addition, Message Queue provides
enterprise-strength capabilities, including advanced integration,
administration, security, and high-availability features.

Message Queue can be used as a stand-alone messaging service or it can
be used as an enabling technology, deployed in a Jakarta EE application
server to provide asynchronous messaging. It is an integral enabling
technology of the GlassFish Server software.

This chapter describes the messaging technology that underlies Message
Queue and explains how Message Queue implements and extends the JMS
specification. If you are familiar with the JMS specification, you can
skip to the section of this chapter on link:#aerau[Message Queue:
Elements and Features]. Otherwise, you should begin at the beginning.

The chapter covers the following topics:

* link:#aeraq[Message-Oriented Middleware (MOM)]
* link:#aerar[JMS as a MOM Standard]
* link:#aerau[Message Queue: Elements and Features]

[[aeraq]][[GMTOV00049]][[message-oriented-middleware-mom]]

Message-Oriented Middleware (MOM)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Because businesses, institutions, and technologies change continually,
the software systems that serve them must be able to accommodate such
changes. Following a merger, the addition of a service, or the expansion
of available services, a business can ill afford to recreate its
information systems. It is at this most critical point that it needs to
integrate new components or to scale existing ones as efficiently as
possible. The easiest way to integrate heterogeneous components is not
to recreate them as homogeneous elements but to provide a layer that
allows them to communicate despite their differences. This layer, called
middleware, allows software components (applications, enterprise java
beans, servlets, and other components) that have been developed
independently and that run on different networked platforms to interact
with one another. It is when this interaction is possible that the
network can become the computer.

As shown in link:#gbpdh[Figure 1-1], conceptually, middleware resides
between the application layer and the platform layer (the operating
system and underlying network services).

[[GMTOV00001]][[gbpdh]]


.*Figure 1-1 Middleware*
image:img/to_middleware.png[
"Figure shows applications and components being able to communicate via
middleware. The figure is explained in the text."]


Applications distributed on different network nodes use the application
interface to communicate without having to be concerned with the details
of the operating environments that host other applications nor with the
services that connect them to these applications. In addition, by
providing an administrative interface, this new, virtual system of
interconnected applications can be made reliable and secure. Its
performance can be measured and tuned, and it can be scaled without
losing function.

Middleware can be grouped into the following categories:

* Remote Procedure Call or RPC-based middleware, which allows procedures
in one application to call procedures in remote applications as if they
were local calls. The middleware implements a linking mechanism that
locates remote procedures and makes these transparently available to a
caller. Traditionally, this type of middleware handled procedure-based
programs; it now also includes object-based components.
* Object Request Broker or ORB-based middleware, which enables an
application's objects to be distributed and shared across heterogeneous
networks.
* Message Oriented Middleware or MOM-based middleware, which allows
distributed applications to communicate and exchange data by sending and
receiving messages.

All these models make it possible for one software component to affect
the behavior of another component over a network. They are different in
that RPC- and ORB-based middleware create systems of tightly-coupled
components, whereas MOM-based systems allow for a looser coupling of
components. In an RPC- or ORB-based system, when one procedure calls
another, it must wait for the called procedure to return before it can
do anything else. In these synchronous messaging models, the middleware
functions partly as a super-linker, locating the called procedure on a
network and using network services to pass function or method parameters
to the procedure and then to return results.

MOM-based systems allows communication to happen through the
asynchronous exchange of messages, as shown in link:#gbpcx[Figure 1-2].

[[GMTOV00002]][[gbpcx]]


.*Figure 1-2 MOM-Based System*
image:img/to_mom.png[
"Elements of MOM system: clients using APIs to exchange messages via a
messaging provider. Figure is described in text."]


Message Oriented Middleware makes use of messaging provider to mediate
messaging operations. The basic elements of a MOM system are clients,
messages, and the MOM provider, which includes an API and administrative
tools. The MOM provider uses different architectures to route and
deliver messages: it can use a centralized message server or it can
distribute routing and delivery functions to each client machine. Some
MOM products combine these two approaches.

Using a MOM system, a client makes an API call to send a message to a
destination managed by the provider. The call invokes provider services
to route and deliver the message. Once it has sent the message, the
client can continue to do other work, confident that the provider
retains the message until a receiving client retrieves it. The
message-based model, coupled with the mediation of the provider, makes
it possible to create a system of loosely-coupled components. Such a
system can contin

One other advantage of having a messaging provider mediate messaging
between clients is that by adding an administrative interface, you can
monitor and tune performance. Client applications are thus effectively
relieved of every problem except that of sending, receiving, and
processing messages. It is up to the code that implements the MOM system
and up to the administrator to resolve issues like interoperability,
reliability, security, scalability, and performance.

So far we have described the advantages of connecting distributed
components using message-oriented middleware. There are also
disadvantages: one of them results from the loose coupling itself. With
a synchronous messaging system, the calling function does not return
until the called function has finished its task. In an asynchronous
system, the calling client can continue to load work upon the recipient
until the resources needed to handle this work are depleted and the
called component fails. Of course, these conditions can be minimized or
avoided by monitoring performance and adjusting message flow, but this
is work that is not needed with a synchronous messaging system. The
important thing is to understand the advantages and liabilities of each
kind of system. Each system is appropriate for different kinds of tasks.
Sometimes, you will need to combine the two kinds of systems to obtain
the exact behavior you need.

link:#gbpdl[Figure 1-3] shows the way a MOM system can enable
communication between two synchronous messaging systems (for example,
two RPC-based systems). The left side of the figure shows an application
that distributes client, server, and data store components on different
networked nodes for improved performance. This is a discount airline
reservation system: an end user pays a fee to use this service, which
allows it to find the lowest available fare for given destinations and
times. The data store holds information about registered users and about
airlines that participate in this program. Based on the user's request,
logic on the server queries participating airlines for prices, sorts
through the information, and presents the three lowest bids to the user.
The right side of the picture shows an RPC-based system that represents
the ticket/reservation system for any one of the participating airlines.
The right side of the picture would be replicated for as many airlines
as the discounter is connected to. For each such airline, the data store
would hold information about available flights (seating, flight times,
and prices). The server component would update that information in
response to data input by the end user. The airline server also
subscribes to the MOM service, accepting requests for information from
the discount reservation system and returning seating and pricing
information. If a customer decides to purchase a discounted ticket on a
PanWorld flight, the server component for that system would update the
information in the data store and then either generate a ticket for the
requester or send a message to the discounting service to generate the
ticket.

[[GMTOV00003]][[gbpdl]]


.*Figure 1-3 Combining RPC and MOM Systems*
image:img/to_rpc_mom.png[
"Figure shows two RPC based systems communication via a MOM system.
Figure is explained in the text."]


This example illustrates some of the differences between RPC and MOM
systems. The difference in the way in which distributed components are
coupled has already been mentioned. Another difference is that while RPC
systems are often used to distribute and connect client and server
components in which the client component is directly accessed by an
end-user, with MOM systems, client components are often heterogeneous
software systems that can only interoperate by means of asynchronous
messaging.

A more serious problem with MOM systems arises from the fact that MOMs
are implemented as proprietary products. What happens when your company,
which depends on SuperMOM-X acquires a company that uses SuperMOM-Y? To
resolve this problem, a standard messaging interface is needed. If both
SuperMOM-X and SuperMOM-Y implemented this interface, then applications
developed to run on one system could also run on the other. Such an
interface should be simple to learn but provide enough features to
support sophisticated messaging applications. The Java Message Service
(JMS) specification, introduced in 1998, aimed to do just that. The next
section describes the basic features of JMS and explains how the
standard was developed to embrace common elements of existing
proprietary MOM products as well as to allow for differences and further
growth.

[[aerar]][[GMTOV00050]][[jms-as-a-mom-standard]]

JMS as a MOM Standard
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Java Messaging Service specification was originally developed to
allow Java applications access to existing MOM systems. Since its
introduction, it has been adopted by many existing MOM vendors and it
has been implemented as an asynchronous messaging system in its own
right.

In creating the JMS specification, its designers wanted to capture the
following essential elements of existing messaging systems:

* The concept of a messaging provider that routes and delivers messages
* Support for reliable message delivery
* Distinct messaging patterns or domains such as point-to-point
messaging and publish/subscribe messaging
* Facilities for pushing messages to message consumers (asynchronous
receipt) and having them pulled by message consumers (synchronous
receipt).
* Common message formats such as stream, text, and byte

Vendors implement the JMS specification by supplying a JMS provider
consisting of libraries that implement the JMS interfaces, of
functionality for routing and delivering messages, and of administrative
tools that manage, monitor, and tune the messaging service. Routing and
delivery functions can be performed by a centralized message server, or
they can be implemented through functionality that is part of each
client's runtime.

Equally, a JMS provider can play a variety of roles: it can be created
as a stand-alone product or as an embedded component in a larger
distributed runtime system. As a standalone product, it could be used to
define the backbone of an enterprise application integration system;
embedded in an application server, it could support inter-component
messaging. For example, Jakarta Platform Enterprise Edition (Jakarta EE) uses
a JMS provider to implement message-driven beans and to allow EJB
components to send and receive messages asynchronously.

To have created a standard that included all features of existing
systems would have resulted in a system that was hard to learn and
difficult to implement. Instead, JMS defined a least common denominator
of messaging concepts and features. This resulted in a standard that is
easy to learn and that maximizes the portability of JMS applications
across JMS providers. It's important to note that JMS is an API
standard, not a protocol standard. Because all JMS clients implement the
same interface, it is easy to port one vendor's clinet to another
vendor's JMS provide implementation. But different JMS vendors typically
cannot communicate directly with one another.

The next section describes the basic objects and messaging patterns
defined by the JMS specification.

[[aeras]][[GMTOV00115]][[jms-messaging-objects-and-domains]]

JMS Messaging Objects and Domains
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order to send or receive messages, a JMS client must first connect to
a JMS message server (most often called a broker): the connection opens
a channel of communication between the client and the broker. Next, the
client must set up a session for creating, producing, and consuming
messages. You can think of the session as a stream of messages defining
a particular conversation between the client and the broker. The client
itself is a message producer and/or a message consumer. The message
producer sends a message to a destination that the broker manages. The
message consumer accesses that destination to consume the message. The
message includes a header, optional properties, and a body. The body
holds the data; the header contains information the broker needs to
route and manage the message; and the properties can be defined by
client applications or by a provider to serve their own needs in
processing messages. Connections, sessions, destinations, messages,
producers, and consumers are the basic objects that make up a JMS
application.

Using these basic objects, a client application can use two messaging
patterns (or domains) to send and receive messages. These are shown in
link:#gbpdg[Figure 1-4].

[[GMTOV00004]][[gbpdg]]


.*Figure 1-4 JMS Messaging Domains*
image:img/to_2domains.png[
"Figure shows one client sending messages using a queue and another
client sending messages using a topic. Figure is explained in text."]


Clients A and B are message producers, sending messages to clients C, D,
E, and F by way of two different kinds of destinations.

* Messaging between clients A, C, and D illustrates the point-to-point
domain. Using this pattern, a client sends a message to a queue
destination from which only one receiver may get it. No other receiver
accessing that destination can get that specific message.
* Messaging between clients B, E, and F illustrates the
publish/subscribe domain. Using this broadcast pattern, a client sends a
message to a topic destination from which any number of consuming
subscribers can retrieve it. Each subscriber gets its own copy of the
message.

Message consumers in either domain can choose to receive messages
synchronously or asynchronously. Synchronous consumers make an explicit
call to retrieve a message; asynchronous consumers specify a callback
method that is invoked to pass a pending message. Consumers can also
filter out messages by specifying selection criteria for incoming
messages.

[[aerat]][[GMTOV00116]][[administered-objects]]

Administered Objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The JMS specification created a standard that combined many elements of
existing MOM systems without attempting to exhaust all possibilities.
Rather, it sought to set up an extensible scheme that could accommodate
differences and future growth. JMS leaves a number of messaging elements
up to the individual JMS providers to define and implement. These
include load balancing, standard error messages, administrative APIs,
security, the underlying wire protocols, and message stores. The next
section, link:#aerau[Message Queue: Elements and Features] describes how
Message Queue implements many of these elements and how it extends the
JMS specification.

Two messaging elements that the JMS specification does not completely
define are connection factories and destinations. Although these are
fundamental elements in the JMS programming model, there were so many
existing and anticipated differences in the ways providers define and
manage these objects, that it was neither possible nor desirable to
create a common definition. Therefore, these two provider-specific
objects, rather than being created programmatically, are normally
created and configured using administration tools. They are then stored
in an object store, and accessed by a JMS client through standard Java
Naming and Directory Interface (JNDI) lookups.

* Connection factory administered objects are used to generate a
client's connections to the broker. They encapsulate provider-specific
information that governs certain aspects of messaging behavior:
connection handling, client identification, message header overrides,
reliability, and flow control, and so on. Every connection derived from
a given connection factory exhibits the behavior configured for that
factory.
* Destination administered objects are used to reference physical
destinations on the broker. They encapsulate provider-specific naming
(address-syntax) conventions and they specify the messaging domain
within which the destination is used: point-to-point (queue destination)
or publish/subscribe (topic destination).

JMS clients, however, are not required to look up administered objects;
they can create these objects programmatically. For quick prototyping,
creating these objects programmatically might be easiest. But for
deployment in a production environment, looking up administered objects
in a central repository makes it much easier to control and manage
messaging behavior throughout the system:

* By using administered objects for connection factory objects,
administrators can tune messaging performance by reconfiguring these
objects. Performance can be improved without having to recode client
applications.
* By using administered objects for physical destinations,
administrators can control the proliferation of these destinations
(which can be auto-created) on the broker by requiring clients to access
only preconfigured destination objects.
* Administered objects shield client developers from provider-specific
implementation details and allow the code they develop for one provider
to be portable to other providers with little or no change.

The use of administered objects completes the set of elements in a JMS
application system, as shown in link:#gbpcy[Figure 1-5].

[[GMTOV00005]][[gbpcy]]


.*Figure 1-5 Basic Elements of a JMS Application System*
image:img/to_jmsappelements.png[
"Producers and consumers using administered objects to find destinations.
Figure explained in text."]


link:#gbpcy[Figure 1-5] shows how a message producer and a message
consumer use destination administered objects to access the physical
destination to which they correspond. The marked steps denote the
actions that need to be taken by the administrator and by the client
applications to send and receive messages using this mechanism:

1.  The administrator creates a physical destination on the broker.
2.  The administrator creates a destination administered object and
configures it by specifying the name of the physical destination to
which it corresponds and its type: queue or topic.
3.  The message producer uses a JNDI call to look up the destination
administered object that points to the corresponding physical
destination.
4.  The message producer sends a message to the physical destination.
5.  The message consumer uses a JNDI call to look up the destination
administered object that points to the corresponding physical
destination from which it expects to get messages.
6.  The message consumer gets the message from the physical destination.

The process of using connection factory administered objects is similar.
The administrator creates and configures a connection factory
administered object using administration tools. The client looks up the
connection factory object and uses it to create a connection.

Although the use of administered objects adds a couple of steps to the
messaging process, it also adds robustness and portability to messaging
applications.

[[aerau]][[GMTOV00051]][[message-queue-elements-and-features]]

Message Queue: Elements and Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

So far we have described the elements of message-oriented middleware and
the use of JMS as a way of adding portability to MOM applications. It
now remains to describe how Message Queue implements the JMS
specification and to introduce the features and tools it uses to provide
reliable, secure, and scalable messaging services.

First, like many JMS providers, Message Queue can be used as a
stand-alone product or it can be used as an enabling technology,
embedded in a Jakarta EE application server to provide asynchronous
messaging. link:mq-and-jakarta-ee.html#aerdu[Message Queue and Jakarta EE]
describes the role Message Queue plays in Jakarta EE in greater detail.
Unlike other JMS providers, Message Queue has been designated as the JMS
reference implementation. This designation attests to the fact that
Message Queue is a correct and complete JMS implementation. It also
guarantees that the Message Queue product will remain current with any
future JMS revisions and extensions.

This section covers the following topics:

* link:#aerav[The Message Queue Service]
* link:#aerbd[Message Queue as an Enabling Technology]
* link:#aerbf[Message Queue Feature Summary]

[[aerav]][[GMTOV00117]][[the-message-queue-service]]

The Message Queue Service
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As a JMS provider, Message Queue offers a message service that
implements the JMS interfaces and that also provides administrative
management and control. So far, in illustrating JMS providers, the focus
has been mainly on the role of a broker in delivering messages. But in
fact, a JMS provider must include many additional elements to provide
reliable, secure, and scalable messaging. link:#gbpdm[Figure 1-6] shows
the elements that make up the Message Queue message service (the shaded
elements in the figure).

[[GMTOV00006]][[gbpdm]]


.*Figure 1-6 Message Queue Service*
image:img/to_mqservicesimple.png[
"Figure shows components of the Message Queue service. Figure explained
in text."]


As you can see, a full-featured JMS provider is more complex than the
basic JMS model might lead one to suspect. The following sections
introduce the elements of the Message Queue service shown in
link:#gbpdm[Figure 1-6]:

* link:#ggsby[The Broker]
* link:#ggscs[Client Runtime Support]
* link:#ghzmi[Universal Message Service (UMS)]
* link:#ggsbs[Administration]
* link:#ggsbb[Broker Clusters: Scalability and Availability]

[[ggsby]][[GMTOV00078]][[the-broker]]

The Broker
++++++++++

At the heart of the message service is the broker, which routes and
delivers messages reliably, authenticates users, and gathers data for
monitoring performance.

* To establish connections to both application clients and
administration clients, the broker supports a number of connection
services layered on top of several wire protocols.
* To route and deliver messages, the broker places incoming messages in
their respective destinations and manages message flow into and out of
these destinations.
* To provide reliable delivery, the broker uses a persistent data store
to save state information and persistent messages until they are
consumed. Should the broker or the connection fail, the saved
information allows the broker to restore the broker's state and to
resume operations.
* To provide security for the data being exchanged the broker uses
authenticated connections. Optionally data may be encrypted by running
over a secure protocol like SSL. The broker also uses and manages a
repository that holds information about users and the data or operations
they can access. The broker authenticates users who are requesting
services and authorizes the operations they want to carry out by looking
up information in this repository.
* To monitor the system, the broker generates metrics and diagnostic
information that an administrator can access to measure performance and
to tune the broker. Metrics information is also available
programmatically to allow applications or administrators to adjust
message flow and patterns to improve performance.

The Message Queue service provides a variety of administrative tools
that the administrator can use to configure broker support. For more
information, see link:brokers.html#aerdd[Built-in Administration Tools].

[[ggscs]][[GMTOV00079]][[client-runtime-support]]

Client Runtime Support
++++++++++++++++++++++

Client runtime support is provided in libraries that you use when
building and running Message Queue clients. You can think of the client
runtime as the part of the Message Queue service that enables the
client. For example, when client code makes an API call to send a
message, code in these libraries is invoked that packages the message
bits appropriately for the protocol that will be used to relay the
message to a physical destination on the broker.

[[aeraz]][[GMTOV00033]][[java-and-c-client-support]]

Java and C Client Support

A JMS provider is only required to support Java clients; however, as
link:#gbpdm[Figure 1-6] shows, a Message Queue client can use either the
Java API or a proprietary C API to send or receive a message. These
interfaces are implemented in Java or C runtime libraries, which do the
actual work of creating connections to the broker and packaging the bits
appropriately for the connection service being used.

* The Java client runtime supplies Java clients with the objects needed
to interact with the broker. These objects include connections,
sessions, messages, message producers, and message consumers.
* The C client runtime supplies C clients with the functions and
structures needed to interact with the broker. It supports a procedural
version of the JMS programming model. C clients cannot use JNDI to
access administered objects, but can create connection factories and
destinations programmatically. Message Queue provides the C API to
enable legacy C and C++ applications to participate in JMS-based
messaging.

There are a number of differences in the functionality provided by these
two APIs; these are documented in
link:client-programming-model.html#aercf[Java and C Clients].

It is important to remember that the JMS specification is a standard for
Java clients only. C support is specific to the Message Queue provider
and should not be used in client applications that you plan to port to
other providers.

[[aerba]][[GMTOV00034]][[support-for-soap-messages]]

Support for SOAP Messages

SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) allows the exchange of structured
data between two peers in a distributed environment. The data exchanged
is specified by an XML schema. SOAP message delivery is limited to using
the point-to-point domain and does not by itself guarantee reliability.

However, Message Queue Java clients are able to send and receive SOAP
messages, encapsulated as JMS messages. By encapsulating a SOAP message
in a JMS message and delivering it using the broker, you can take
advantage of full featured Message Queue messaging, which guarantees
reliable delivery and also allows you to use the publish/subscribe
domain. Message Queue provides utility routines that a message producer
can use to encapsulate a SOAP message as a JMS message and that a
message consumer can use to extract a SOAP message from the JMS message.
Message Queue also provides XML schema validation of the encapsulated
XML message.

link:client-programming-model.html#aerce[Working with SOAP Messages]
gives you a more detailed view of SOAP message processing.

[[ghzmi]][[GMTOV00080]][[universal-message-service-ums]]

Universal Message Service (UMS)
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The Universal Messaging Service (UMS) and its messaging API provides
access to Message Queue from any http-enabled device. As a result,
almost any application can communicate with any other application and
benefit from the reliability and guaranteed delivery of the Message
Queue service.

The UMS, which runs in a web server, is language neutral and platform
independent. The UMS serves as a gateway between any non-JMS client
application and Message Queue. It receives messages sent using the UMS
API, transforms them into JMS messages, and produces them to
destinations in the Message Queue broker by way of the broker's
connection services. Similarly, it retrieves messages from destinations
in the broker, transforms them into text or SOAP messages, and sends the
messages to non-JMS clients as requested by the clients through the UMS
API.

The simple, language-independent, protocol-based UMS API supports both
Web-based and non-Web-based applications, and can be used with both
scripting and programming languages. The API is offered in two styles: a
simple messaging API that uses a Representational State Transfer
(REST)-style protocol, and an XML messaging API that embeds the protocol
in a SOAP message header. In both cases, however, the API requires only
a single http request to send or receive a message.

The simplicity and flexibility of the UMS API means that AJAX, .NET,
Python, Ruby, C, Java, and many other applications can send text message
and/or SOAP (with attachment) messages to JMS destinations or receive
messages from JMS destinations. For example, Python applications can
communicate with .NET applications, iPhone can communicate with Java
applications, and so forth.

[[ggsbs]][[GMTOV00081]][[administration]]

Administration
++++++++++++++

The Message Queue service offers command line tools that you can use to
do the following:

* Start and configure the broker.
* Create and manage destinations, manage broker connections, and manage
broker resources.
* Add, list, update, and deleted administered objects in a JNDI object
store.
* Populate and manage a file-based user repository.
* Create and manage a JDBC compliant database for persistent storage.

You can also use a GUI-based administration console to perform the
following command-line functions:

* Connect to a broker and manage it.
* Create and manage physical destinations.
* Connect to an object store, add objects to the store, and manage them.

In addition, to these built-in administration tools, Message Queue also
supports the Java Management Extensions (JMX) specification for
configuring and monitoring brokers, destinations, connection services,
and so forth. Using the JMX Administration API, you can perform these
administration functions programmatically from within a Java
application.

[[ggsbb]][[GMTOV00082]][[broker-clusters-scalability-and-availability]]

Broker Clusters: Scalability and Availability
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Message Queue brokers can be connected into a broker cluster: a set of
brokers that work collectively to perform message delivery between
message producers and consumers. Broker clusters add scalability and
availability to the Message Queue service, as described briefly in the
following sections:

* link:#ggsaa[Message Service Scalability]
* link:#ggsbd[Message Service Availability]

For additional information on broker clusters, see
link:broker-clusters.html#aerdj[Broker Clusters]

[[ggsaa]][[GMTOV00035]][[message-service-scalability]]

Message Service Scalability

As the number of clients or the number of connections grows, you might
need to scale a message service to eliminate bottlenecks or to improve
performance. In general, you can scale a message service both vertically
(increasing the number of client applications that are supported by a
single broker) and horizontally (distributing client applications among
a number of interconnected brokers).

Vertical scaling usually requires adding more processing power for a
broker and by expanding available resources. You can do this by adding
more processors or memory, by switching to a shared thread model, or by
running the Java VM in 64 bit mode.

Horizontal scaling is generally achieved using a broker cluster. While
it is possible to scale horizontally by simply redistributing clients
among additional brokers that are not in a cluster, this approach is
appropriate only if your messaging operations can be divided into
independent work groups. However, if producer clients must produce
messages to be consumed by consumer clients connected to remote brokers,
then brokers must work collectively, as part of a broker cluster, to
achieve horizontal scaling.

In a broker cluster, each broker is connected to every other broker in
the cluster. Brokers can reside on the same host, but more often are
distributed across a network. Each broker can route messages from
producers to which it is directly connected to consumers that are
connected to remote brokers in the cluster.


[NOTE]
=======================================================================

If you are using the point-to-point domain, you can scale the consumer
side by allowing multiple consumers to access a queue. This is a Message
Queue feature (the JMS specification defines messaging behavior in the
case of only one consumer accessing a queue). When multiple consumers
access a queue, the load-balancing among them takes into account each
consumer's capacity and message processing rate.

=======================================================================


[[ggsbd]][[GMTOV00036]][[message-service-availability]]

Message Service Availability

In addition to providing for message service scalability, broker
clusters also provide for message service availability. If one broker in
a cluster fails, then other brokers in the cluster are available to
continue to provide messaging services to client applications.

Message Queue supports two clustering models that provide different
degrees of availability:

* Conventional broker clusters. A conventional broker cluster provides
message service availability. When a broker or a connection fails,
clients connected to the failed broker reconnect to another broker in
the cluster. However, messages and state information stored in the
failed broker cannot be recovered until the failed broker is brought
back online. This can result in an interruption of message delivery.
* Enhanced broker clusters. An enhanced broker cluster provides data
availability in addition to message service availability. When a broker
or a connection fails, another broker takes over the pending work of the
failed broker. The failover broker has access to the failed broker's
messages and state information. Clients connected to the failed broker
reconnect to the failover broker. In an enhanced cluster, as compared to
a conventional cluster, a failure results in no interruption of message
delivery.


[NOTE]
=======================================================================

You can also achieve data availability in a conventional cluster by
using Solaris Cluster software. Solaris Cluster software replicates
broker data and provides for a hot standby broker to take over the
pending work of a failed broker. For details, see the documentation for
the Solaris Cluster Data Service Agent for Message Queue.

=======================================================================


[[aerbd]][[GMTOV00118]][[message-queue-as-an-enabling-technology]]

Message Queue as an Enabling Technology
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Jakarta Platform Enterprise Edition (Jakarta EE) is a specification for a
distributed component model in a Java programming environment. One of
the requirements of the Jakarta EE platform is that distributed components
be able to interact with one another through reliable, asynchronous
message exchange. This capacity is furnished by a JMS provider, which
can play two roles: it can be used to provide a service and it can
support message-driven beans (MDB), a specialized type of Enterprise
Java Bean (EJB) component that can consume JMS message.

A Jakarta EE-compliant application server must use a resource adapter
furnished by a given JMS provider to use the functionality of that
provider. Message Queue provides such a resource adapter. Using the
support of a plugged in JMS provider, Jakarta EE components, including
MDBs, deployed and running in the application server environment can
exchange JMS messages among themselves and with external JMS components.
This provides a powerful integration capability for distributed
components.

For information on the Message Queue resource adapter, see
link:mq-and-jakarta-ee.html#aerdu[Message Queue and Jakarta EE]

[[aerbf]][[GMTOV00119]][[message-queue-feature-summary]]

Message Queue Feature Summary
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Message Queue has capabilities and features that far exceed the
requirements of the JMS specification and JMS API. These features enable
Message Queue to integrate systems consisting of large numbers of
distributed components exchanging many thousands of messages in
round-the-clock, mission-critical operations.

The following enterprise-strength features, which are listed
alphabetically in link:mq-optional-jms-support.html#aerdz[Message Queue
Features], can be divided into the quality-of-service categories below:

Integration Support

* Multiple connection services, including HTTP connections and secure
connections
* Jakarta EE resource adapters
* SOAP support
* Schema validation of XML messages
* C client support, including support for distributed transactions
* LDAP server support

Security

* Authentication
* Authorization, including JAAS-based authentication
* Secure connections, including encryption

Scalability

* Broker clusters
* Queue delivery to multiple consumers
* Thread management
* Multiple destinations for a publishers or subscriber

Availability

* Broker clusters, including conventional clusters and enhanced clusters
* Connection ping for health checks
* Automatic reconnect
* Connection event notification

Performance

* Tunable performance
* Memory resource management
* Message flow control
* Configurable physical destinations
* Message compression

Serviceability

* Administration tools
* Message-based monitoring API
* JMX-based administration
* Java ES Monitoring Framework support
* Client runtime logging
* Dead message queue
* Broker configurations
* Configurable persistence


